Online DDL: managed online schema changed via gh-ost and pt-online-schema-change (#510)
vitessio/website: content/en/docs/user-guides/schema-changes/_index.md

---
title: Making Schema Changes
description:
weight: 11
aliases: ['/docs/schema-management/schema-changes/', '/docs/user-guides/schema-changes/']
---

> The following section illustrate the problem space of schema changes and the various approaches you may use with Vitess.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This user guide describes the problem space of schema changes and the various approaches you may use with Vitess.
```

Author: fixed

Quick links:

- Vitess supports EXPERIMENTAL [managed, online schema changes](../managed-online-schema-changes/) via `gh-ost` or `pt-online-schema-change`, and with visibility and control over the migration process
- Multiple approaches to [unmanaged schema changes](../unmanaged-schema-changes/), either blocking, or owned by the user/DBA.

Some background on schema changes follows.

## The schema change problem

> Schema change is one of the oldest problems in MySQL. With accelerated development and deployment flows, engineer find they need to deploy schema changes sometimes on a daily basis. With the growth of data this task becomes more and more difficult. A direct MySQL `ALTER TABLE` statement is a blocking (no reads nor writes are possible on the migrated table) and resource heavy operation; variants of `ALTER TABLE` include `InnoDB` [Online DDL](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/innodb-online-ddl-operations.html), which allows for some concurrency on a `primary` (aka `master`) server, but still blocking on replicas, leading to unacceptable replication lags once the statement hits the replicas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Schema change is one of the oldest problems in MySQL. With accelerated development and deployment flows, engineers find they need to deploy schema changes sometimes on a daily basis. With the growth of data this task becomes more and more difficult. A direct MySQL `ALTER TABLE` statement is a blocking (no reads nor writes are possible on the migrated table) and resource heavy operation; variants of `ALTER TABLE` include `InnoDB` [Online DDL](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/innodb-online-ddl-operations.html), which allows for some concurrency on a `primary` (aka `master`) server, but still blocking on replicas, leading to unacceptable replication lags once the statement hits the replicas.
```

Author: fixed

> `ALTER TABLE` operations are greedy, consume as much CPU/Disk IO as needed, are uninterruptible and uncontrollable. Once the operation began, it must run to completion; aborting an `ALTER TABLE` may be more expensive than letting it run through, depending on the progress the migration has made.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ALTER TABLE` operations are greedy, consume as much CPU/Disk IO as needed, are uninterruptible and uncontrollable. Once the operation has begun, it must run to completion; aborting an `ALTER TABLE` may be more expensive than letting it run through, depending on the progress the migration has made.
```

Author: fixed

Direct `ALTER TABLE` is fine in development or possibly staging environments, where datasets are either small, or where table locking is acceptable.

## ALTER TABLE solutions

Busy production systems tend to use either of these two approaches, to make schema changes less disruptive to ongoing production traffic:

- Using online schema change tools, such as [gh-ost](https://github.com/github/gh-ost) and [pt-online-schema-change](https://www.percona.com/doc/percona-toolkit/3.0/pt-online-schema-change.html). These tools _emulate_ an `ALTER TABLE` statement by creating a _ghost_ table in the new desired format, and slowly working through copying data from the existing table, while also applying ongoing changes throughout the migration.
  Online schema change tools can be throttled on high load, and can be interrupted at will.

> - Run the migration independently on replicas; when all replicas have the new schema, demote the `primary` and promote a `replica` as the new `primary`; then, at leisure, run the migration on the demoted server. Two consideratoin to using this approach are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Run the migration independently on replicas; when all replicas have the new schema, demote the `primary` and promote a `replica` as the new `primary`; then, at leisure, run the migration on the demoted server. Two considerations if choosing this approach are:
```

Author: fixed

  - Each migration requires a failover (aka successover, aka planned reparent).
  - Total wall clock time is higher since we run the same migration in sequence on different servers.

## Schema change cycle and operation

The cycle of schema changes, from idea to production, is complex, involves multiple environments and possibly multiple teams. Below is one possible breakdown common in production. Notice how even interacting with the database itself takes multiple steps:

1. Design: the developer designs a change, tests locally
2. Publish: the developer calls for review of their changes (e.g. on a Pull Request)

> 3. Review: developer's cooleagues and database engineers to check the changes and their impact

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Review: developer's colleagues and database engineers to check the changes and their impact
```

Reviewer: We should officially change it to `cooleagues` :)

Author: fixed

4. Formalize: what is the precise `ALTER TABLE` statement to be executed? If running with `gh-ost` or `pt-online-schema-change`, what are the precise command line flags?
5. Locate: where does this change need to go? Which keyspace/cluster? Is this cluster sharded? What are the shards?

>   Having located the affecetd MySQL clusters, which is the `primary` server per cluster?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Having located the affected MySQL clusters, which is the `primary` server per cluster?
```

Author: fixed

6. Schedule: is there an already running migration on the relevant keyspace/cluster(s)?
7. Execute: invoke the command. In the time we waited, did the identity of `primary` servers change?
8. Audit/control: is the migration in progress? Do we need to abort for some reason?
9. Cut-over/complete: a potential manual step to complete the migration process
10. Cleanup: what do you do with the old tables? An immediate `DROP` is likely not advisable. What's the alternative?
11. Notify user: let the developer know their changes are now in production.
12. Deploy & merge: the developer completes their process.

Steps `4` - `10` are tightly coupled with the database or with the infrastrcture around the database.

## Schema change and Vitess

Vitess solves or automates multiple parts of the flow:

### Formalize

In [managed, online schema changes](../managed-online-schema-changes/) the user supplies a valid SQL `ALTER TABLE` statement, and Vitess generates the `gh-ost` or `pt-online-schema-change` command line invocation. It will also auto generate config files and set up the environment for those tools. This is hidden from the user.

### Locate

> For a given table in a given keyspace, Vitess knowns at all times:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a given table in a given keyspace, Vitess knows at all times:
```

Author: fixed

- In which shards (MySQL clusters) the table is found
- Which is the `primary` server per shard.

> When using either managed schema changes, or dircet schema changes via `vtctl` or `vtgate`, Vitess resolves the discovery of the affected servers automatically, and this is hidden from the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using either managed schema changes, or direet schema changes via `vtctl` or `vtgate`, Vitess resolves the discovery of the affected servers automatically, and this is hidden from the user.
```

Author: fixed

### Schedule

In managed, online schema changes, Vitess owns and tracks all pending and active migrations. As a rule of thumb, it is generally advisable to only run one online schema change at a time on a given server. Following that rule of thumb, Vitess will queue incoming schema change requests and schedule them to run sequentially.

### Execute

> In managed, online schema changes, Vitess owns the execution of `gh-ost` or `pt-online-schema-change`. While these ru nin the background, Vitess keeps track of the migratoin state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In managed, online schema changes, Vitess owns the execution of `gh-ost` or `pt-online-schema-change`. While these run in the background, Vitess keeps track of the migratoin state.
```

Author: fixed

In direct schema changes via `vtctl` or `vtgate`, Vitess issues a synchronous `ALTER TABLE` statement on the relevant shards.

### Audit/control

In managed, online schema changes, Vitess keeps track of the state of the migration. It automatically detects when the migration is complete or has failed. It will detect failure even if the tablet itself, which is running the migration, fails. Vitess allows the user to cancel a migration. If such a migration is queued by the scheduler, then it is unqueued. If it's already running, it is interrupted and aborted. Vitess allows the user to check on a migration status across the relevant shards.

### Cut-over/complete

Vitess runs automated cut-overs. The migration will complete as soon as it's able to.

### Cleanup

In the case of managed, online schema changes via `pt-online-schema-change`, Vitess will ensure to drop the triggers in case the tool failed to do so for whatever reason.

> _Coming shortly_, Vitess will auotmtically garbage-collect the "old" tables, artifacts of `gh-ost` and `pt-online-schema-change`. It will drop those tables in an incremental, non blocking method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vitess will automatically garbage-collect the "old" tables, artifacts of `gh-ost` and `pt-online-schema-change`. It will drop those tables in an incremental, non blocking method.
```

Reviewer: Now that https://github.com/vitessio/vitess/pull/6719 has been merged, I assume "coming shortly" can be deleted.

Author: fixed

## The various approaches

> Vitess allowed a variety of approaches to schema changes, from fully automated to fully owned by the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vitess allows a variety of approaches to schema changes, from fully automated to fully owned by the user.
```

Author: fixed

- Managed, online schema changes are _experimental_ at this time, but are Vitess's way forward

> - Direct, blocking ALTERs are generlaly impracticle in production given that they can block writes for substantial times.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Direct, blocking ALTERs are generally impractical in production given that they can block writes for substantial lengths of time.
```

Author: fixed
